Fix ESM/CJS problems (#112)
hyperledger/iroha-javascript: .changeset/gentle-dodos-beam.md

---
'@iroha2/client': major
---

**feat!**: move isomorphic http/ws adapters out of `Client` internals; expose `@iroha2/client/web-socket/native` and `@iroha2/client/web-socket/node` adapters

> **Why the change was made**. Previously, `@iroha2/client` used `@iroha2/client-isomorphic-ws` and `@iroha2/client-isomorphic-fetch` to switch between environment-specific transports seamlessly. It was done by `module` & `main` fields in `package.json`s and due how they work in CommonJS context and ESM context. It was supposed that in Node.js it is always CJS context, and ESM stands for browser context with its native APIs. However, Node.js moves towards ESM further and further, and in this case previous hack to achieve isomorphism doesn't work - in ESM it tries to use Browser's native `fetch` and `WebSocket`, which aren't available in Node.js. So we needed to find some other way.
> 
> **What is the change**. We looked at how [`isomorphic-git`](https://github.com/isomorphic-git/isomorphic-git/tree/main#getting-started) solves the same problem and decided to force the end users to inject `fetch` and `ws` by themselves. Note that `fetch` injection is optional in the environment where Fetch API is available (i.e. in Browser or in Node > 17.5). Also, `@iroha2/client` exposes prepared adapters for WebSockets based on native `WebSocket` and on [`ws`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ws) library.
> 
> **How to migrate**. You need to provide `fetch`/`ws` (depending on your need) by yourself. Please follow the instruction in README.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why the change

Previously, `@iroha2/client` used `@iroha2/client-isomorphic-ws` and `@iroha2/client-isomorphic-fetch` to seamlessly switch between environment-specific transports.

The switching was done by `module` and `main` fields in `package.json` files due to how they work in CommonJS (CJS) and ESM contexts. In Node.js it was supposed to always be CJS context, and ESM was for browser context with its native APIs. 

However, Node.js is moving towards ESM, and our way to achieve isomorphism no longer works in this case. In ESM, our hack tries to use a browser's native `fetch` and `WebSocket`, which aren't available in Node.js. So we needed to find some other way.

## What is the change

We looked at how [`isomorphic-git`](https://github.com/isomorphic-git/isomorphic-git/tree/main#getting-started) solves the same problem and decided to force the end users to inject `fetch` and `ws` by themselves.

Note that `fetch` injection is optional in the environment where Fetch API is available (i.e. in Browser or in Node > 17.5). Also, `@iroha2/client` exposes prepared adapters for WebSockets based on native `WebSocket` and on [`ws`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ws) library.

## How to migrate

Provide `fetch`/`ws` by yourself. Follow the instruction in README.
```

last line: which readme? the one in the packages/cleint?

Author: Yes, Client's README.

I am not sure about usage of headers in your suggestion. Later this changeset will be transformed into a CHANGELOG entry which already has it's own headers structure. Maybe it will be broken by headers from the changeset.

Anyway, it is not a big problem - I will be free to edit changelog later.

Reviewer: ok, maybe then not add the headers, but I've suggested other changes within the content. Also, you might want to repeat this info in the client readme itself because not everyone is going to look at the changelogs
